One more?
I've got these to hand out if I just-
Oh, they're great. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. Cheers. Thank you.
Thank you. There's one at the front and one at the back.
Give them to you. All right. Hey, morning.
Morning.
All right. Well, look, we have limited time, so we'll just get
underway. And look, so thank you very much. Introduce yourselves.
And then, the time is yours for 30 minutes.
Use it as you will.
Emily, it's great to have some questions, but up to you how you structure it.
Thank you. Kara ko tau katoa, thanks all for your
time and for giving us the opportunity to brief you.
We've come with two issues that we want to talk about,
and potential solutions, of course.
Just wanted to check in with you whether you'd like us to go through both of the
issues
first and then discuss at the end or do one at a time.
I think go through and then, yeah, leave the time at the end would be good.
Yeah, so.
Okay. Thank you.
I'm sure you're just as worried as me at the moment about financial
wellbeing in our communities.
I want to just take a moment to thank the many financial
mentors who are tuning in online from their communities.
And also, we have Teresa White here with us from Auckland Central
Budgeting. We're speaking on their behalf,
and like them, we're here with solutions.
So our first ask is for committee members to help us achieve steady
funding for financial mentors.
We're seeking $25 million in contributions from industry groups
and at least another $5.5 million from government each
year. Our conservative analysis shows a total of $50
million per annum of steady funding is needed just to keep up
with current demand.
And look, we heard last week of another handful of financial mentors losing their
jobs due to a lack of funding.
They're most concerned about continuity of care for the over 200
households they serve.Steady funding combined with our
sector's work to professionalize can deliver what our communities need right
now and what they'll need for some time to come.
So safe, consistent, and timely support for households that are
financially distressed or at risk of a financial
problem sending them that way,
more money back in pockets and circulating through the economy,
good financial mentoring jobs, and more financial capability
and wellbeing, which means less call on social supports in the
longer term.
While cost of living concerns make the need for financial mentoring
critical now, that won't just magic away when employment figures
or other measures improve.
Whenever credit's offered, there's a risk that some can't manage repayments,
and that's just a fact of the system.
And debt being incurred now from households trying to juggle costs will
become unmanageable for some.
You'll know debt has a long tail, and these issues could present to financial
mentors any time over the next decade, likely tangled with
other arrears, weekly deficits involving multiple creditors.
And it's to this point on the long leg of debt problems, our
second ask of you is to consider an inquiry into
how attachment orders for private debt are causing
hardship and what can be done to prevent this.
I'll hold the detail on that for Jake to talk you through.
We hope you've all met a financial mentor by now, but to quickly give some
context, FinCAP supports over 700 financial mentors
around the country,
and their work is much more than preparing a budget, as you'll hear from
Teresa in just a moment.
Free financial mentors have been around for over six decades in
communities, but the complexity of financial issues has
intensified.
And to address this, we are progressing an aspirational five-year
professionalization program, Te Tapapa.
Professionalization can ensure financial mentors are equipped to
offer safe and consistent support for households in
the years ahead.
So to what's happening on the ground now to prompt the funding ask,
I'll hand over to Teresa.
Yeah. Kia ora. Thanks, Fleur.
As Fleur's already said, I work for Auckland Central Budgeting.
I'm the general manager there and a financial mentor.
And to start with, I want to share some recent examples
of our work to illustrate our impact and the need in
the community.
Also, what the consequences might be if there's not
easy and ready access to a financial mentor.
The following is an example of a lender referring a client who needed
support.
Alice came to us via FinCAP's MoneyTalks helpline.
She was in arrears on her mortgage.
She admitted to us that she'd been gambling.
We referred her on to get professional help and supported her to block
online gambling sites.
We worked with the bank to set up a system that limited access to prevent
further gambling and negotiated a repayment plan with them.
The bank is now getting paid, and Alice is on the road to recovery rather than
spiraling further down into debt.
Mary
came to us because she's finding it hard to keep up with a car loan and wanted us
to organize a lower repayment.
We managed to negotiate with the creditor, and they waived the interest and fees on
the loan, which was unaffordable from the outset.
Because she engaged with our service, Mary has saved
$12,000 and more if we factor
in the potential for future late fees, default interest, and the possibility for
repossession.
Greg reached out to us after being visited by a debt
collector seeking $15,000 for an old debt for
a car that was stolen over five years ago.
Despite his belief that he'd already paid what was owed, Greg promised to
pay the debt collector $50 a week.
Due to health issues, Greg is on a benefit and his budget was already in deficit.
$50 a week was not affordable, and the repayment plan would have fallen over.
We had concerns about the plan, the debt balance, and the initial
affordability of the loan.
We worked with the debt collector to come to a resolution, and they eventually
waived the remaining balance.
There was a high chance that if Greg had not engaged with us when he did,
an attachment order would have been applied to his benefit to repay a questionable
debt.
Both Mary and Greg came to us because we are nearby and because we've
helped them in the past. We've saved them both thousands of dollars
and have likely prevented further impacts.
And demand for this kind of service is high.
We support about 900 to 1,000 people like Mary,
Alice, and Greg every year,
but we've not had steady funding since the last MSD tender in
2024.
And because of that, we've had to make multiple changes, including
redundancies, to remain open so that we can continue to support the community.
But operating at reduced capacity isn't sustainable long
term.
We're juggling complex and multiple caseloads,
volunteering additional time, along with the additional work
associated with fund-seeking.
And you may be aware
that competition for grant funding is high, and there's often not
enough to cover all costs.
We are, however, really grateful to our donors because each dollar
helps to extend our timeline.
But without
a substantial funding boost, there is potential for
closureAnd if we close,
then what will happen to the thousand or so people that we support every year?
Because we're not alone. Other services like ours are
also under pressure due to high demand, and expecting
people to travel further and wait longer only puts them at greater risk of multiple
negative impacts.
Car repossessions, not being able to buy food, and eviction,
potentially.
So we fully back FINCAT's call for industry contributions
and increased government funding for our sector.
And because we also see the benefits to our
clients, we support the drive to professionalize.
But without secure, sustainable, substantial funding, our future is
uncertain and professionalization feels out of reach.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks, Teresa. So in 2024,
MBC said 132,000 households couldn't afford to
keep their homes adequately warm, and actually, the Public Health
Communication Center said that number was more likely to be
360,000 households.
If you compare that potential need to the 30,000 closed
financial mentoring cases that we saw in our system last year,
that 30,000 was a 57% increase since 2021.
But at best, it's less than a quarter of the households
MBC can't afford to heat their home.
Investment in financial mentoring jobs makes sense.
And in the absence of up-to-date social impact numbers here, we look
to the already professionalized sector in Australia.
Our equivalent body in Victoria recently
indicated our future potential impact with a social return on
investment of $3.70 to $5.30 for
every dollar spent resourcing their professional financial counselors.
And actually, we're not exactly the same because their practice has far less
valuable financial capability life skills than ours.
Our survey at the start of this year told us 40% of financial mentors'
time is taken responding to requests to help with KiwiSaver hardship
withdrawals.
And we know that's no fault of KiwiSaver providers, but
mentors' work does ultimately benefit them.
For example, if alternative options to alleviate hardship are found,
the funds stay in, or a clear plan for the withdrawn amount
is made and there aren't future
withdrawals.
So that's why we've signaled this as the first industry to look at for levies.
Some businesses see the case for industry contribution but worry it
will lead to government removing its funding.
So a clear signal of support from this building can help us get the ball rolling
with meaningful voluntary contributions, and this could take
the form of a public commitment to explore the solution or a letter of
expectation from a minister to industry.
I do want to assure you, we haven't just landed this out of nowhere on the
potential for industry to contribute up to $25 million of
the $30.5 million gap in funding.
So Australia's financial counseling industry fund lists
21, so at least 21 contributors who we recognize as
having links to New Zealand businesses.
And the UK's had levies in place on financial services for more than a
decade.
We do understand the word levy seems loaded, and it's prone to
inspiring debate.
We're not looking at this as a penalty.
We're looking at it as a positive investment for the
future and for certainty, as is
Australia.
So again, our ask of you today is that the committee members support our
call to achieve steady funding.
Specifically, could the committee request
officials to provide
2026 modeling for the actual costs and benefits of a
fully funded, professionalized, and sustainable financial mentor
workforce that doesn't rely on volunteers?
And could they explore the opportunity for a forum between government,
financial mentors, and essential services businesses to
discuss the potential for industry contributions to financial
mentors' essential work?
And,
just sorry, extra, could the committee agree to write to
senior ministers asking them to express public support for
industry contribution to essential financial mentoring?
And
could they ask senior ministers to consider our paper's proposed
amendments to the Financial Market Authority's levy?
I've been referring to information from our industry co-funding paper, which we
released recently.
I think you've been sent that electronically, or you have copies of it here.
So thank you for hearing-
What page is that?
Sorry?
What page? Is that on the one you gave us?
Yeah, this one.
What, which page is that, those specific asks that you're reading out?
Near the back.
Yeah.
I think second to last. Excuse me.
Those specific asks that I just read out won't be in the paper, but we can send
those.
What are they?
No, the levy proposal is in there.
Levy proposal is in.
Yeah, and I'll send through a copy of it.
We might get a list of it from you after.
Those, that was really good. So if you can send us that separately.
Yeah.
Yeah. No problem.
No problem.
Thanks for hearing about this serious issue.
And now I'm going to bounce over to Jake for the next one.
All right. And sorry, lots of information between the two, but
hoping to get through the questions quickly.
So our concern is there's a loophole in the system where
9 out of 10 debts
that are going through the attachment order system are applied to benefit rather
than wages. Obviously, those on a benefit struggle to repay debt.
The benefit amounts-It's income that shouldn't be going to keep, or
what should be going to bills being paid today rather than looking back
to ones from the past, and I'll share some concerns about very old debts.
Yeah. We're asking you to consider committee inquiry into these
attachment orders. I'll tell you some significant numbers in a moment and why that
might be justified.
But here's a breakdown of how this comes about.
You have a debt that's created at some point or an alleged debt that's created some
point. At some point, a creditor or someone they've sold the debt to takes
it into the Ministry of Justice,
Central Registry team, which acts on behalf of the courts.
They will often stamp a judgment saying, "Yes, this debt is owed,"
especially after a period of time where they've had no response from the debtor.
We have questions around what communication actually gets to a lot of debtors.
That then can go into an application for an attachment order.
Again, no response, you're very likely to see a stamp of $30 a week against
someone's benefit.
And then these stack up to 40%
when you hit the protected earnings rate.
So we have seen people having a lot of these going up to 40% of a
benefit income every week before they get paid.
Many people walk in the door to a financial mentor and don't realize they have
these. The financial mentor will pull up the statement from MSD and say, "What's
that?" And even then they won't recognize the creditor because it may have been
sold so many times.
Often the case is reported to us in shock.
And it seems some businesses have realized it's really good money in using the
system, hence the nine out of 10 against beneficiaries.
Because basically once it's set up,
it's a very reliable payment source relative to the wages
sourcing, dealing with employers.
So 88% of them
were granted against beneficiaries when we checked with MoJ last
year.
And we've recently got data from MSD, which tells us that more than a quarter of
those who have attachment order deductions on their benefits go on to apply
for and be approved for temporary additional support.
And this means MSD recognizes they are experiencing hardship.
So the latest numbers we've got from MSD are
$711,000 of these payments, and those $30
increments most often leave MSD each week.
And amongst their client pool, just looking at temporary additional support alone,
we've got $708,000 going out a week.
So not direct correlation, but one of the contributing factors to being in
hardship.
I highlight significant spending from government going where it really isn't
intended, we believe. It's giving value to otherwise very doubtful
debts.
It also shows a system failing to collect through attachment orders without causing
hardship, and we pose the question, should $36.9 million
be going to debt collectors direct instead of benefit households,
especially if some of these debts, as I've alluded to,
we're looking at decades or multiple decades old.
Teresa shared one of those with me, looked at all the documents.
You see in November '23, an attachment order is put down
$14,000 against an old debt, and it needs to be paid $30 a
week. That will take forever. This debt's not going anywhere.
This person had already paid $5,000 since she bought a computer in
1999. The contract said $6,000 for that computer.
As I said, $14,000 is still owed in 2023.
Repayments in 1999 were a fifth of that person's income, so it was very likely to
be unaffordable from the start.
Teresa started work with this person at an outreach for people who had
experienced homeless or were homeless at the moment, which explains varied payments
over many years, on and off attachment orders, all sorts of contact issues.
It's one story of $30 a week, but I stress that the
related businesses collecting here are getting $30,000 per week in these small
payments.
We're glad to see, since we actually wrote to the committee, that the total number
going out each week has reduced somewhat.
This is the first time we've seen that since we've been really tracking it.
But we know that these older debts in particular will hang around forever,
even if the overall numbers are going down.
We're not alone in our concern on these issues.
Financial mentors FinCap have been working most recently a lot with Community Law,
see, and Christians Against Poverty on this issue.
We've sought legal advice and legal support to see what we can do, but we're really
picking these off one at a time, not getting into the system at scale.
And it's become abundantly clear from legal advice that really this building is the
best place to get some good movement here at scale to the overall
systemic issue.
So the District Court Act overrides the Social Security Act.
There were changes in 2014 and for good reason, to make the whole process simpler,
but we think it's drifted from the policy intent and it needs
review.
And we really assert that they should not have a system
that has a loophole in it that means attachment orders are used like an ATM for
paying very old debt and burning up government funds, then
needing more support from MSD and plus all the
difficulty in terms of engaging with MSD to get that support.
We ask the committee to consider a committee inquiry into hardship from attachment
orders on benefits.
We also ask you if you could request from officials updates on
what might be done at MSD to actually help people when they get one of these things
applied from their benefit. There are a few options, although they are very
difficult to get these suspended, varied, or canceled.
I don't think I've seen a single case where financial mentors managed to get one
canceled without legal support, and that's very difficult to access, particularly
for a very vulnerable person.
And besides an inquiry, we'd ask your help as members, anything you can do
towards helping us achieve a moratorium on these while there's actually a good time
to review how this hardship is arising, where the system settings need to go.
We'd suggest starting with a forum across all the different agencies involved.
We've spoken to them all individually, but they all sort of don't meet and say,
"How is this all working?"
And we've always thought, looking again over to Victoria and Australia, their
judgment proof debtor settings, which I can describe in more detail if of
interest.Have worked well for
coming on four decades now. I think it's 1984, so actually more than that.
We'd see that as the ultimate outcome, but obviously review is well and
truly needed.
I'd also just mention Teresa and I have blocked out most of the morning if it is
helpful and anyone has time. I know that's not something you have a lot of in this
building.
But if it is helpful to find out more after this as well, please get in contact.
Well, good. Thank you very much. And I just say thank you to
you and every other financial mentor in the country for the work they're doing.
Yeah.
It's hugely important,
so thank you. I might just ask, we don't have much time for questions,
but a couple of quick points just on
this, especially you were talking about Jake.
So you're saying $36.9 million per annum
is the government is effectively paying through the benefit
system to pay these old debts that have been established through these
attachment orders.
Yeah, I should stress I've really talked about these old debts a lot.
There are other pieces in there.
Yeah
But obviously these are the ones we see stick forever.
Yeah. No, I do get sort of the underlying concern about some of the debt as well,
because I was a duty lawyer in the Monaco District Court, I remember going with a
guy, he listed all their debts and trying to see if they applied for legal
aid, and turned out he had a $10,000 car he'd purchased.
And I worked out that over the course of the period of that loan, it was going to
be $90,000 to pay it off.
Wow.
So there are some really bad ones, aren't there?
Yeah.
Which may historically... But there is a tension.
I'd be interested in your thoughts on the tension between access to finance
for people who otherwise cannot access it because they are a bit high
risk,
and ensuring that it's affordable.
Where does that sit in what you've seen?
Obviously, we do a lot of work on the credit board as well.
Mm.
And I think there is a balance there.
I would say just, again, looking over to Australia,
they've had this judgment-proof debtor setting, and it hasn't seemed to impact
access to credit overall. Also hard to tell, it's been over 40 years.
But having worked over there,
same sort of issues. So I don't think it's to the point where it would
be stopping things. I think the other one you might get concerned about in there is
tenancy and what happens when tenancy debts arise.
But again,
we don't see that. We're already seeing people struggling regardless if they're on
benefit to get a tenancy. I don't think this would have much other impact.
And also, there was sort of issues in the past.
There were blog posts that were public until not long ago, once we point them
out, that
property investors giving other property investors advice
to try and get these attachment orders against women because you're more
likely to have a larger benefit with child
support pieces in there. Sorry, know all the technical terms.
So yeah, things to weigh up here, but
can't turn away from that $30 means a lot to someone on a benefit.
And I've always got one other question, and it's just around the broader workforce
and the cost of that, et cetera. Have you done any work yet on
potential applicability of AI to empowering your financial
advisors to... Because there's a lot of information you need to pass through, and
it's quite complex. But these artificial intelligence tools are moving at such a
pace. Is that something that's being looked at yet?
I know that a lot of the services
are looking at AI in terms of how they streamline
some of the work that they do. It's not a
big piece of work that we've been able to invest in because
us, like financial mentoring services, it's actually we don't have the resources
either to go there at the moment. So things like actually
sustainable, steady funding are going to help with all those sorts of things.
It's difficult.
Yeah. I was just going to say there's a-
Chicken and egg
... fair point, chicken and egg. But there is a potential opportunity to
significantly reduce the cost of those services, and a
pay model probably-
And it-
There is a funding aspect to it.
Yeah. And I think also there's a fundamental thing about
strengths-based financial mentoring, which means that you do need
to have that
face-to-face or person-to-person contact as well.
So AI can help with aspects of it, but it won't-
AI could do a lot of the back-end work.
Right.
And then there's just the human interaction to-
Yes
... explain it in a human term. Sort of face-to-face.
Helen.
Thank you for coming. I want to ask something about the relationship
that you have with the KiwiSaver providers, because my understanding is each
of their forms is different, and each has
a requirement to actually come to your
services, yet there is nothing built in here,
which means that you are being paid for those
services. Have you been able to address that with any kind of
peak body,
or do we need to regulate?
Do you want to answer that one or think-
We've had some meetings with the peak for a lot of those services.
We're very much in conversation.
So why aren't they paying?
I
guess there wasn't a warm- ...
acceptance of the paper so far, and that's their job
as well.
So yes, it might need something else. We would like to keep talking, though.
I think there's much more conversation to be had.
We've only had a very short meeting so far.
Yes, this goes to the idea of an inquiry or further work by the committee,
is we need to say what is going on here that you would
rely on these services that you're not building in a cost for.
There's a response that we didn't cause this
problem. So-
I'll go to her.
Which is absolutely correct.
Yeah, thank you.
Just timing, I'm aware-
Very quick. Just FYI, the bells go at 9:00 this morning because we're in
extended hours, so that's why we're in a bit of a rush.
Okay.
My question actually does follow on from Helen's one, because there would
be a really good business case to answer for some of those institution
that you're suggesting-That are levied.
But the business case for them being that or
voluntarily contributing is actually quite strong once you consider the
cost of chasing those debts, but then also the cost of writing them off
or going through these orders. So,
are you saying that that was not received very well?
We have talked very much about voluntary contribution too, knowing
anything takes time here-
Yes
... if there was to be a levy set up. But we thought it would also be good to
signal the certainty of a levy over time, would be exactly what we need.
Yes.
Really, what we're here for is sustainable funding-
Mm
... so that Theresa's not chasing grants. She's financial mentoring.
Yes.
So we-
And of course. Sorry. But of course now the budget's pretty much
locked in.
So the runway is pretty much gone for extra
funding to be allocated.
But have you applied or talked to the ministry, the minister,
and what was that reception like?
So, the minister, not the minister, the
ministry that we work with, MSD,
knows that we are doing this work, and they're really supportive.
But also pushing hard at their end to try and get
things. I think it's one of those situations where
actually this is, it's a huge problem.
The peak bodies understandably are saying,
no,
there needs to be a push.
I'm sorry, just because of the time, and we do have Mayors Taskforce for Jobs as
well. But it's a fascinating, great work. Great.
Give us a lot to think about, and I'm sure we're going to have a lot of questions
and we'll circle back to you on. But thank you very much for coming.
Thank you very much for having us.
Thanks a lot.
Thank you for what you're doing.
Thank
you.
All right. Good morning and welcome to the Social Services and Community Select
Committee. Great to have Mayors Taskforce for Jobs here this morning.
And Mayor Bell and Tammy Metcalf.
So look, the time has, we've got slightly less than 30 minutes.
The bell's going to go, and we're going to have to rush off to Parliament.
But, if you could give us your presentations and if you want to leave us some
time for questions,
that'd be awesome.
Fantastic. Thank you very much. I don't need to press any buttons or anything?
Nope.
Lovely.
You're live.
Just very different to a council table, I must say.
Do you guys have the presentation that we sent around?
We should. Yep, we do.
You've got copies of it?
Yeah.
Cool.
There's spare ones here if anybody's-
Yeah
... need printed ones we can dish out.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Mayor Ben Bell. I'm the mayor of the Gore District Council.
And for my sins, also the chair of Mayors Taskforce for Jobs.
And this is Tammy Metcalf, and she is the program manager for Mayors Taskforce for
Jobs. So we're the dream team that deliver
lots of
outcomes all across the country,
which we're very proud of.
I thought what I would do is give a brief overview of what Mayors
Taskforce for Jobs is. It's a little bit complicated, and then I'll talk about the
contract that we've got, and we're really keen to talk about more so the NEAT issue
that we've got in this country. Less about the contract and things of the
state. But going to try and leave lots of time for questions that you guys can
ask us, because we have lots of information that we're happy to share out.
And also just acknowledging that Joseph Mooney is my local MP, so
he's had to listen to me many times talking about Mayors
Taskforce, so-
It's al- it's always worthwhile.
Exactly. Thank you.
Don't worry, you're on the agenda.
Yeah.
Professional.
Yeah. But thank you very much for inviting me. I really appreciate it.
So, just to do a really brief breakdown.
So there's kind of two parts to Mayors Taskforce for Jobs.
So the first part is the membership.
So we have 50 membership councils all up and down the country.
We even have members such as Auckland and Christchurch, which is great because
LGNZ doesn't have those as members.
So we're really excited to have those as members.
They pay into that. It's a very small fee, but that helps with
partnerships. So we have partnerships with the Two Year Program,
Outward Bound, and also the King's Trust as well.
So that gives them opportunities to deliver through that.
The other side of Mayors Taskforce for Jobs is the
Community Employment Program, so the CEP.
You'll hear me reference that a bit, and that's what we'll talk about largely
today. So that's the $8 million contract that we
have with MSD. There's quite a bit of history with that.
So, we've had it for about six years now.
We've delivered close to 10,000 outcomes throughout the process
of that. We've had as much as $14 million worth of funding,
and our incoming year is $8 million worth of funding.
And that's just due to
changes within government and operational
changes.We used to be
able to look after everyone, 16 to 24-year-olds.
With the change in government direction, that has been pushed more towards
job seekers, so 80% job seekers, 20% NEETs.
We're not going to contest that here today.
I just wanted to give a bit of context for the journey that we've been on.
We're really proud. We have delivered
1,073 outcomes this year, all
up and down the country, which is fantastic.
Our target was only 900, so we've already exceeded our target, and we've
got a month and a half to go. So we're really, really happy with that.
And like I said, that's a large amount off job seekers, so that's a
big impact for the New Zealand economy, and also
getting our young people into work as well.
So that CEP program is across 36 councils
from the far north all the way to, Clutha's
slightly below me, so Clutha will be the lowest.
And it really just depends on the need that's in those different councils.
Primarily rural and provincial, but we are branching out into metro
areas such as
Palmerston North City Council has recently bought on our program as well.
So we're really excited for that program too.
So that's the
CEP stuff. We want to talk a little bit about NEETs and the growing issue that's
here, and I know there's been a little bit of media around it as of late.
And we just wanted to talk and kind of bring it up with the committee
of, we see a growing need in that 16 to 18-year-old,
and will ultimately become the 16 to 19-year-old
bracket by the end of the year, that aren't on jobseeker,
aren't in employment, aren't in training or education.
So these are kind of, I like to describe them, and I know I'm
being very stereotypical here, but they are the young people who,
like myself, became disinterested with school, didn't really think it
was their thing.
But then instead of going into employment, which I was lucky enough to
have, they are able to live with their parents and maybe play PlayStation
or
do one of those stereotypical types of things.
That's really challenging for us and also for the social sector is
if a young person leaves school at 16 and has no social
interaction until they hit job seeker at 18, they are
significantly harder to place than if we picked them up at 16
and then got them a job immediately.
So that's kind of the area that we want to talk about today.
Just going to grab the slides.
So as you'll see, there are more than one in eight young New
Zealanders that are currently in NEET.
So just re-clarifying, a NEET is not in education,
employment or training.
And it's a leading indicator of welfare dependency in this country as
well.
As I talked about, the 16 to 18-year-old group is the critical window of
where we can take them from education, put them back into education or into
training or into employment. But if they sit in this void, that's where it becomes
really challenging.
That's where the NTFJ model really works.
Our mayors on the ground, we have the connections with the schools.
We have the connections with the employers. We live and work in our community.
We understand the challenges of that.
So it's really important that we engage with our young people, make them feel
welcome in our communities. We support them.
So when the children's commissioner came and spoke to us, she said that, and
also that Helen Clark Foundation's data backs this up, that our young people
are some of the most hopeful people in this country.
But in a lot of cases, there's no one to stand beside them.
And what's really heartening for me is that our mayors all up and down
the country are the ones standing beside them through the Mayors Taskforce for Jobs
program.
And then the third part of the model is to employ.
We have the connections with the employers. There are lots of jobs out there.
It's just connecting A with B and helping them go on that pathway.
And sometimes it can be as easy as getting them work boots or
tools or even, in a lot of cases, just a little bit of counseling to
deal with that social anxiety.
In rural and provincial communities, and we
spent last week talking with the Canterbury
coordinators, and southern coordinators as
well. Driver's license is such a barrier for our young people.
To get a driver's license in the Mackenzie District, you've got to drive all the
way out to Timaru, which is a two-hour drive.
So you've got to get a parent or a family member or someone, and
then God forbid you fail it, then you've got to go out there again.
That's training. That's a four-hour round trip.
So
that's just the reality of living in a rural community, but these are the sorts of
barriers when a lot of jobs you need your restricted license in the first
instance.
We have a lot of great evidence and data with
Mayors Taskforce for Jobs. That's what makes us really special, and we really value
our partnership with the Social Investment Agency.
They've been fantastic in helping us process this data.
And we will get to a little bit of their data in a second.
But the research is really key here.
NEETs are increasing. I think some of this data that you'll have in your pack is
slightly old. 86,000, I think it was 108,000 that's come
out in the recent quarter of NEETs in this country.
It's a growing need. It's difficult for our young people to get jobs,
especially with the economic times, because a lot of those
lower-level jobs are getting taken up by people who would quite often have
higher paying jobs. And then also with the
increase in AI as well, those lower-level jobs are also disappearing too.
So I think what the most powerful slides are in the pack is
this chart. You'll have it here, which is this
one here.
So this is data with the Social Investment
Agency.
What they did is they took all of the participants that we've had throughout the
life of the program. They're all anonymized, and then they go and be matched up
with the government's data that they have through welfare
systemsSIN numbers
SWIN numbers
... SWIN numbers, that's it, and match them up.
So what you can see here is a young
person with almost identical conditions.
The only difference is that that young person has been engaged
with MAYAS Taskforce to jobs, and the others haven't.
And you can see the direct impact of once they get a job,
they're most likely to stay in employment for a long period of time, which
is really great to see.
Same with the other side of the fence as well.
We're not all about just getting jobs.
Our coordinators, although they don't get recognized for it, are also really keen
on getting young people back into education and back into training as well.
So we don't count those as outcomes in the current system.
It's just the amazing work that our coordinators do because they want to help
regardless.
I'll just jump in there.
Sure.
Sorry.
It shows that, after a three-year period, the
young person has been placed into employment and then is more likely to
go into higher education, i.e., an apprenticeship.
So that pathway planning and that career goal
setting, it's not just we're going to go and place you in the meat
works. You're going to go hammer hand, we're going to keep supporting
you, and then what that shows is actually after three years they're more likely to
get an apprenticeship.
Thank you for that, Tammy.
Then we can just go into the social investment.
It's pretty bog standard. You invest a dollar, you get
$5.60 in return. It's primarily because we're taking
people off JobSeeker, we are getting them into employment, which helps
the economy at the end of the day.
Our ask is firstly, I think it'd be great to have a conversation,
and I'm happy to answer questions around that NEET issue and what we can all do
collectively, local government and central government, to help those young people
where there isn't a lot of need. Acknowledge the position as well that
politicians may have that these young people aren't costing the system
anything. They're not on JobSeeker, they're not in
education, they kind of sit in this void.
Our opinion on the ground is that that makes things worse in the long term, rather
than the short-term gain of not having them on a welfare system.
A personal plea, and Minister Upson is well aware
of this and cross-party as well. We do year-on-year
contracting. Minister Upson was great when we did two years worth of contracting
when this government came in.
But three years would be fantastic full term.
It gives certainty to our coordinators up and down the country.
They get really uncertain at this time of year with budget bids and the way
the government works, and I appreciate that being as part of a council of how all
of that works. Our coordinators don't.
Their contract kind of comes to an end the 30th of June, so
trying to give them some confidence that they're going to have employment.
And luckily, the contract's always been rolled over.
It's just giving that certainty. The second is re-expanding that scope for
intervention. MAYAS up and down the country really want to get back into the
schools, really want to start dealing with those NEETS again.
And we honestly think that we can do the job seeker work and
also the NEET work as well. We just need a little bit of the funding to do it,
and that's where investing in what works. That's the key thing.
We're a proven program. We've been around for 26 years, 6 years on the CEP
program.
And it's all your MAYAS across the country as well who are the ones running it at
the end of the day.
I'll stop it there because I love answering questions more than talking.
Tammy, did you have anything to add?
No, that's good.
Perfect.
All right, thanks.
Questions. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you.
I'll say, Ben, we know each other pretty well.
No. You're all good.
Look,
this is a great program, and that $5.60 return for
every $1 invested is a great return.
And I just like how every time we have a conversation, you learn more.
I did not know, for example, that you had disengaged from the education system.
And
as had I. I left school without qualifications and
found my way through a very messy process to eventually returning to
university and getting an honors degree in law.
And then, you ended up becoming a MAYAS Mayor in the country.
And now equal with Rob Scott, Southland, you're the
most experienced mayors in the southern part of the South Island.
So you never know. But the problem is that's not where everyone-
Yeah
... finds their way through.
Yeah.
So things like this I think are really important. So it's great to hear this.
I think to your point, Chair, is that everyone could, but if we let our
young people sit at home, and sorry, I know it's a terrible
example because they might be out graffitiing or doing something different.
They might not be at home playing PlayStation.
But if we can get those young people into employment, even if it's four hours.
Mine was just four hours working a checkout, which then ultimately developed into
where I am today.
Yeah, absolutely. That's helpful.
So yeah, that's the little help.
Awesome. And I agree with you to your point that this is an
untapped resource both for that individual, that family, and for the
community. But Helen.
Great. Thank you. And it does sound really amazing.
I am interested in, you've had a success
and the scaling of that, the kind of structural potential of
it. I had a meeting on Sunday in my
electorate with a group of people from different
ethnicities, and one was a young
woman who had done an engineering degree and she just couldn't get a
job. And I would say that was my prevailing
lesson last week, is everywhere I went, people were working in vape shops, and
they had tech degrees, et cetera.
Mm.
And it felt like they were locked out because there was a scarcity of work.
And they had no one to bring them on that pathway.
Mm.
Do you think that given you're at the kind of ground of
things, that there's a bit more potential in
this-
There is, yeah
... than just the groups that at the moment-
Yes
... you're focusing on?
Can I take that one?
Sure.
We hear that quite often, and it's played out in the
media at the moment, and I
can almost give you the script of what happens with all of them.
They are told when they leave school,
through wonderful careers advisors and gateway
coordinators, that you write a really great CV, and you
apply on SEEK or Trade Me, and you send that out to the world.
What we do is not that. No. We throw the CV out,
basically. We give up on competing
in the market with plenty of really skilled professionals that are applying
through SEEK and Trade Me. Quite often, and I know
my husband is an aircraft refueler here at Wellington Airport, they had over
100 applications, and most of them were from overseas applicants.
So rather than competing in that market, which is what your young person's
talking about, we meet with them, give them some
practical skills around how you present yourself in person, rather
than everything is digitized and you hope that
you've
got through the ChatGPT filter when you send your CV online.
And we then match them with an employer that is going to
understand their specific needs, and we introduce them in person. Mm.
We
typically encourage the employer to take the young person on maybe in
a less
formal environment. So rather than having an interview, you might say,
"Hey, would you like to just work there for an hour,
two hours, get to know the employee and the employer,
see if it's a good match?" And then that generally,
90% of the time, the employer will go, "Oh, actually, they've got a really great
attitude, and I'll start them off somewhere," and then there'll be a
pathway. And maybe it's not the perfect
entry-level job for the degree, but it's a foot in the door.
I'll never forget one placement I made.
I was a coordinator in the Horowhenua.
All our young men come out of high school, "I'm going to be a builder.
I'm going to be a builder." Trying to find a building apprenticeship
straight out of school is impossible.
So I said, "We've got some really great council
contractors who are resurfacing our swimming pools up and down the country."
Flooring apprenticeship is just that wonderful
scope of what construction and building is.
And so that young person was placed into
an entry-level job with the flooring.
It's a plastic sort of
coating that goes on our swimming pool.
So you've got to look for those pathways in, like you both,
all of us have had, rather than the straight line, which our young
people think is how you get a job. Maureen?
Thanks very much. Actually, you made me feel really old because I
remember-
Part of MTFJ
I remember, I was a colleague of Dale Williamson-
Mm
... actually, when the seed for Mayors Taskforce was planted.
Yeah.
So yeah, have known about it for a long time and been closely involved with
Dale during that period. But-
Awesome
... there are a lot of other entities that are
doing similar things. So,
how do you ensure that Mayors Taskforce isn't overlapping with the likes
of
what MSD, for a start, REAP around the country?
How do you make sure that you're not competing-
I get what you mean
... or how do you ensure that you're coordinating across those other
entities?
Yeah. Thank you for that question. It's a valid one.
I guess the magic within Mayors Taskforce to Job really is the mayor.
It's that ownership of that local community, that local mayor
that's being involved. We are working closely with MSD into our new
contract. They're letting us know where they've got other placements as well, other
contracts, that we're not double-dipping.
But to be brutally honest, there's a lot of need out there.
Mm-hmm.
Even if there is overlap.
Factor is in there.
Yeah. There's lots of jobs that need to be filled, so.
But I
don't think... So Mayors Taskforce for Jobs doesn't operate like a typical
MSD contracted service. We are about community, and we're about opening
doors. And so where the mayor says to a
local roading contractor, "We've got young people that need jobs,"
we don't need to always tick the box.
And if we're able to open that door for a REAP or another service
and say, "Hey,
we'll help you train those young people up," this is how the contract used to work.
We'd put on a mass of 15 people on a forklift course.
They weren't all Mayors Taskforce for Jobs clients, but it was the right thing to
do for the community.
Yeah.
And then connect them up with the contractor that the council
is tendering for a particular project, and then the whole
community and all those other providers are also benefiting, rather than it
just being closed to MTFJ.
Right. So great partnership, you mean?
Mm.
Laurel?
Cool. Thank you so much, and thanks for presenting to the committee.
I'm going to be straight up and honest, unlike Maureen and my colleague.
I didn't know about this initiative until it landed on-
Mm
... my desk. So I'm in Christchurch, and I love Phil, so
let's not bag him.
But what are you doing to
get this message out to young people, that this is a service that's available?
And I can think of at least a small handful of
ones that are sitting at home that have left school in my friend group.
Might have some children involved, or some family members.
So
yeah, what is the plan as far as communication and
reaching these ones? If they're about to leave school, you can capture them.
But what if they've already not been at school for two years?
Mm.
They're not in any course. They're the exact ones that you're talking about.
So they're not getting MSD because they're living at home.
All of those kind of things. How are you trying to
market this as a potential option-
Mm
... or opportunity?
Yeah, that's a really good question.
For those 16 to 18-year-olds,
we're not actively trying to. We used to work in
the schools. So
in my local area, we used to go into the school and say, "Hey, if you've got anyone
who's leaving school, they don't know what they're doing, come and see Mayor's
Taskforce for Jobs, and we'll see if we can get them into employment." We don't
operate in that space anymore. We get referrals from MSD and then try and help
those clients in a large portion. The 20% that we have left
over for needs is literally young people who walk through the door.
Mm-hmm.
And that's just our coordinators wanting to help them
because they have nowhere else to go in a lot of cases.
Met with Mayor Phil, awesome dude. He got me Warriors tickets.
He had a handful of people he was speaking of, too, yeah.
Yeah. So he knows the need in Christchurch as well.
It's not really where we operate. We'd love to.
We'd absolutely love to, especially small pockets of large metro
areas where there is real need. We're actively
talking with West Auckland. There's a bit of need there and whether we could help a
bit there, too. So
in terms of marketing, with more money, we could always market more.
In a wider scope.
TikTok. Yeah.
Yeah.
And TikTok, I mean-
Yeah
... getting our young people to promote it themselves is the best way.
Okay.
Is a-
So generally-
Yep ... aunties, uncles, grandparents- Yeah ...
they're the ones that reach out. I had a dad ring me
yesterday who
has an amazing son, 19. He played rugby overseas.
He's played for Kia Toa and Palmerston North, which is a pretty hardcore rugby
group, and same issue, just
dad rings up. "I don't want him sitting at home anymore." But because
Christchurch isn't part of the current funding cycle with MSD,
and that target group that you're talking about isn't part of our,
is only 20% of our current funding cycle with
MSD,
we'd love to,
but we're just
constrained by our- Yeah ... current-
Budget
So that goes to contract and changes. Yeah.
Just really interested in opportunities of scaling up and maybe
connecting to other things like procurement.
And you've got three minutes.
Yeah. Great question. So in terms of scaling up, first off,
we're already in 36 councils. We're looking at adding a few more this time around
as well because the further spread we are, the better the marketing, the knowledge,
all of that good stuff. Social procurement's a really interesting one.
When I talked about the other side of Mayor's Taskforce,
that's where we want to build in some capacity for people who may not have the CEP
program. So we have a lot of the systems that can track our young people and know
when they get employment. I'm going to speak through this.
The way I like to talk about it is councils quite often have a
clause within their contracts for public tenders that are 5% social
procurement. A lot of councils have no way of tracking that.
It's very much just a feel-good thing for the contractor.
So we think there could be a place there.
We're still in very early conversations with MB and other groups as
well as to what that may look like. But we really think that when a council
takes on a procurement contract, we can track the social procurement
outcomes from that. But it's still very early days.
But we're work- Yeah, I think that's a great idea.
And encouraged through that success of achieving the target for the
contractor and the council, that would mean that more young people are
employed regardless of what we were doing with our MSD contract.
We just really want to,
as it is in other countries,
the
social procurement is a law. In New Zealand, it's a rule,
and so councils do it out of the goodness of their heart, and we want to build on
that. Yeah. And the reason for that question is,
as you were saying, so hard for our young people to compete in those entry-level
jobs, and to get those opportunities, and you have this way of pathway in.
So some more opportunity and structure around
that could really meet that need. Yes. Yeah.
Absolutely. Thank you very much for that.
I think, yeah, 26 years, Laurie Morrins been, now
great to have you, Ben, carrying on the new center.
Tammy, rather. And look, I think probably one of the key things or the
benefit, as we touched on, Ben, is
the leadership role. And I guess that comes down to
relationships
and just the whole information ecosystem they have in local communities, that just
all their different relations and information I've seen, that's probably the key
part. It's the mayors having ownership of their- Yeah ...
yeah, their community outcomes at the end of the day. Yeah.
And that's where their hearts are, so. That's awesome. No, thank you very much.
Thank you.
Awesome. Thank you so much. I'll need to get a
photo with you, Ben, before you get off. Yes.
Because we're taking off and get
to
Mark